Name of the task of generating news headlines is pretty self-explanatory: having a news text you need to generate a short title for it that reflects an essence of the news. This problem is a special case of the abstractive summarization. In contrast to the extractive summarization, where it is sufficient to select the most important words or sentences from the text, in the abstractive summarization we can use paraphrasing or words not contained in the original text.
The rapid development of recurrent networks and language models shakesup research of abstractive summarization methods. Transformer architecture an excellent replacement of RN
N and allowed us to train deep networks faster without loss of quality. A key part of the Transformer is an attention mechanism. In classic version of the Transformer, attention allows to model and recognize connections between individual tokens, ignoring connections between phrases directly. An architecture used in this article is based on Phrase Based Attentions , which allows us to fix the described drawback.
RI
A Dataset proposed in been used for training. The dataset consists of approximately one million headline-news pairs of the Russian news agency “
Rossiya Segodnya”.
Section 2 describes the architecture of the model used. Section 3 discusses the dataset, data preprocessing pipeline and training in more detail. Section 4 and 5 describe the experiments and results respectively. Section 6 is devoted to the analysis of offered approach shortcomings and reflections on ways of its solution. Section 7 provides a brief overview of abstract summarization methods proposed by various researchers. In the last section you can find conclusions and arguments on the work done.
2. System description
Denote x, y as sequences of the news text tokens vector representations x = (x1, x2, …, xn) and news header y = (y1, y2, …, ym). We will use a statistical language model to generate header, where 𝜃—model parameters. It is proposed to use the classical Transformer architecture heterogeneous attention language model parameterization. Unlike recurrent neural networks, which have been a state-of-the-art approach to NL
P problems for a long time, the use of the Transformer allows us to learn more effectively. The selfattention mechanism affords to calculate hidden representations of sequences in parallel, while RN
N hidden state ht can be obtained only after calculating the previous state ht − 1. One modification applied to the original transformers in our article is heterogeneous attention. This type of attention extends receptive fields of the model adding an ability to directly model relationships between tokens and phrases. This effect is achieved through the use combination of 1, 2 kernel convolutions applied to the input sequences of attention blocks. Then this convolved sequences are concatenated and used as input of multi-head attention. In the interest of space, we omit the details and send an interested reader to the original articles , .
Phrase
Based Attentional Transformer for Headline Generation3. Data and training3.1. Dataset
We use RI
A dataset1 for train. It contains 1,003,869 news with written headings. On average, header consists of 10 words, and text of news consists of 316 words. A subset of 20,000 examples of this dataset was reserved for testing proposes. The remaining part is used for training.
3.2. Preprocessing
First of all, the entire text of the dataset was reduced to lowercase, all html tags and their contents were removed. In order to simplify model training we use only the first 3 news sentences. It is acceptable due to the fact that the main essence of news contains in the first few sentences. We also limit the maximum number of tokens processed to 150.
The next step in data preparation is to split the text into tokens. It is proposed to use Byte Pair Encoding a tokenization method for both news text and header. This approach is currently a state-of-the-art tokenization method for NL
P problems. BP
E solves a problem of out-of-vocabulary words and works well with morphologically rich languages. We also use word2vec a vector representation of tokens.
3.3. Training
Using a given model parameterization p(y|x, 𝜃), we will minimize the negative log likelihood function NL
L(𝜃) = − log ℒ(𝜃) = − ∑ilog p(yi|xi, 𝜃) during training, where (xi, yi) are training pairs of the dataset.
Models were trained using Adam with parameters 𝛽1 = 0.9, 𝛽2 = 0.98 and ϵ = 10 −9 with learning rate lr = 10 −4. Each iteration of the optimizer uses a batch of data of size equal to 16. Training continues for 10 epochs.
3.4. Inference and evaluation
During inference we will use a beam-search algorithm. Unlike a greedy approach, where a token with the maximum probability is selected for each decoding step, beamsearch uses m most likely independent header generations, trying to maximize resulting likelihood.
The most popular summarization quality metric is ROUG
E . We use ROUG
E-1 (unigram), ROUG
E-2 (bigram) and ROUG
E-l (longest common subsequence) version, scored by F-measure.
1 The dataset is available at https://vk.cc/8W0l5
P
Sokolov A. M. Experiments
In this article2, BP
E and word2vec were trained on the training part of the dataset used. The generated vocabulary contains 30,000 tokens, the dimension of word vector representations is 300. Decoding beam-search size equal to 5.
First Sentence: The simplest and most naive approach to generating headlines. The first sentence of the text is used as a summarization. This approach is used with the assumption that the main point is contained in the beginning of the news.
RN
N: We will use a classic seq2seq with attention as a baseline. Encoder and decoder are five-layer bidirectional GR
U hidden size equal to 500. A dropout with probability equal to 0.1 after each layer is used for regularization. As attention we use attention via dot-product .
Universal Transformer: For comparison, we use the results of Gavrilov et al. , based on Universal Transformer. They used 4 layers in encoder and decoder with 8 heads of attention.
Vanilla Transformer: In this case, we will use the classic Transformer architecture with default settings for both encoder and decoder: 6 layers, 8 attention heads, model hidden size is 512, position-wise block hidden size is 2048, dropout equal to 0.1.
Phrase Based Attentional Transformer: PB
A transformer settings are very similar to the classic Transformer, except for the attention block. It uses the heterogeneous approach: one and two kernel convolution applied to key, value and query. Next, we concatenate this convolved sequence representations and calculate scaled dot-product attention.
5. Results
Model ROUG
E-1-f ROUG
E-2-f ROUGE-l-f
First Sentence 24.08 10.57 16.70RN
N 37.98 20.51 35.36
Universal Transformer 39.75 22.15 36.81
Vanilla Transformer 42.42 25.06 39.50PB
A Transformer 42.96 25.43 40.022 The source code for all experiments is available at
https://github.com/gooppe/deep-summarization-toolkitPhrase
Based Attentional Transformer for Headline Generation
Text: к 2016 году 20 % школ должны быть доступными для обучения инвалидов, в настоящее время этот показатель составляет чуть больше 2 %, сообщил министр труда и социальной защиты максим топилин
на заседании правительства рф. «к 2016 году 20 % школ, не коррекционных, а обычных, должны быть приведены в доступный вид для обучения инвалидов, сегодня этот показатель на начало реализации программы (по доступной среде для инвалидов) составляет 2,5 %», — сказал топилин. по его словам, увеличение в 10 раз — это неплохой показатель, хотя в дальнейшем доступными для обучения инвалидов должны быть все школы.
Original summary: топилин: к 2016 году 20 % школ должны быть доступными для инвалидов
Generated summary: к 2016 году 20 % школ должны быть доступны для инвалидов — минтруд
Text: бригада сахалинского бассейнового аварийно-спасательного управления из-за непогоды приостановила работы на аварийном судне мр-150–289 у южного побережья сахалина, сообщили риа новости в главном управлении мчс рф по региону. судно мр-150–289 шло в портпункт озерск корсаковского района. но из-за поломки в системе теплоподачи судно зашло в бывший портпункт новиково.
Original summary: спасатели из-за непогоды приостановили работы на подтопленном судне
Generated summary: спасатели приостановили работу на аварийном судне у сахалина
As you can see from Table 1, PB
A Transformer shows the best result. The classical recurrent sequence-to-sequence approach is slow. A recurrent network needs much more time to achieve the quality of Transformers. Vanilla Transformer has better results than Universal Transformer presumably due to greater depths. PB
A transformer shows interesting results. Qualitatively, it has a small increase, but its ability to generate abbreviations seems to be quite interesting. Table 2 shows example of PB
A Transformer generation sample.
Unfortunately, this model is not perfect. Sometimes it makes mistakes, such as usage of incorrect forms of words, confuses with key figures or repeating them. However, the model almost always highlights relevant information, which is inspiring.
6. System and error analysis
In this section, we would like to draw reader’s attention to one important problem that appears during testing of trained models on another datasets. The essence of the problem is that a model trained on the dataset of one news Agency cannot be applied to generate news headlines from another source. It seems that data structure should be the same for different news Agencies, but alas, models confuse and generate bad Sokolov A. M. During testing on different datasets, we made sure that naive use of the first news sentence as a title shows results better than generations of trained models. This effect can not be considered as overfitting, because on large test subsets from the same dataset, the model achieves good metric estimates. Firstly, this problem may occure due to strong variability in a style of news and headlines. Each Agency uses its own writing style, and model is strongly attached to it. Secondly, there may be shifts in news domains, because of them model focuses on some specific topics and can not cover all areas of text news. Third, it is hard to find supervised summarization dataset, that covers all aspects of human life. There will be always some aspect missing from the training dataset that will be processed with difficulties by proposed model. More formally, it is impossible to use proposed model on different datasets due to Distribution Assumption: there is one probability distribution D that governs both training and testing examples.
The first thing that comes to mind for solving this problem is the use of pretrained language models on large corpora , , . These models parametrize language prior distribution. Language model can be fine-tuned on a specific dataset, directly to solve summarization problem. It stands to reason that having some General language representation we can more accurately distinguish information from texts that are not even present in the task-specific dataset. This approach can be used as a baseline for further research.
7. Related work
The task of abstract summarization and the task of generating news headlines in particular deserve much attention of researchers. So, Rush et al. the first, who proposed to use a deep, fully connected neural network with an attention mechanism as a language model for generating news headlines. Later, approaches based on recurrent neural networks were proposed: Chopra et al. to use the classic recurrent sequence-to-sequence architecture with attention. Other researchers tried to adapt such approaches to the specifics of automatic summarization. Nallapati et al. several ideas, potentially improving previously proposed models: large vocabulary trick, hieracical attention and copy-from-text approach. the idea of copying some text from the original and proposed to use the Pointer
Generator Network for modelling rare or unseen words. Universal Transformer with BP
E tokenization and offered a new Russian dataset for the research of automatic referencing methods.
8. Conclusion and future work
Under this article, an attempt was made to use a modified Transformer with a phrase based attention mechanism. This modification has improved the quality of the base model and achieved a new state-of-the-art in the task of headline generation on the RI
A dataset. Experiments with testing of trained models on another datasets have led us to the problem of model dependence on the news Agency. In the future the results can be improved by using language models or unsupervised approaches.
Phrase
Based Attentional Transformer for Headline Generation