A key notion in understanding and modelling language is ‘possible word’. While some words (lexemes) are internally homogeneous and externally consistent, we fi nd others with splits in their internal structure (morphology) and inconsistencies in their external behaviour (syntactic requirements). I begin with the characteristics of the simplest lexemes, adopting the approach of Canonical Typology. In this approach, we push our defi nitions to the logical limit, in order to establish a point in the theoretical space from which we can calibrate the real examples we fi nd. Defi ning canonical infl ection, allows us to schematize the interesting phenomena which deviate from this idealization. These include suppletion, syncretism, deponency and defectiveness. I then look at the different ways in which lexemes are ‘split’ by these phenomena. Consider the French verb aller ‘go’, which is split by suppletion. Some of its forms are based on the stem all(as in allons), some on v(as in vont ) and some on ir(as in irons). This example demonstrates that a lexeme’s forms need not have any phonology in common. From this point of view, the split is as radical as it could be; in certain other respects there are more remarkable examples. I therefore set out a typology of possible lexical splits, along four dimensions:1) form versus composition/structure of the paradigm: in the French suppletion example the split concerns forms only and does not affect the structure of the paradigm; contrast this with the deeper split in the Russian verb,
where different segments of the paradigm are sensitive to different featural requirements (gender is marked in the past: but not in the present).
2) motivated versus morphology-internal (morphomic): the Russian split follows a boundary which is motivated from outside the paradigm (it follows
tense), while the French split is purely morphology-internal.
Greville G. Corbett regular versus irregular: splits may be fully regular, extending across the lexicon (all Russian verbs share the featural split), or they may be lexically specifi ed, as we fi nd in Archi (
Daghestanian), where particular cells of individual personal pronouns must be specifi ed as taking agreement (while the remaining cells do not).
4) externally relevant versus irrelevant: we would expect such splits to be internal to the lexeme, as with English go~went, but some have external relevance, in that they lead to different syntactic requirements. Instances include the different alignments found with certain tense-aspect-mood forms
in Georgian, and lexemes whose splits bring with them different gender values, as in Czech, Scots Gaelic and the Tromsø dialect of Norwegian.
Our typology specifies these four dimensions independently. They are orthogonal to each other, so that the unexpected patterns of behaviour may cooccur in particular lexemes, giving rise to some remarkable examples, especially where periphrasis is involved. These examples show that the notion ‘possible word’ is challenging for theoretical and for applied work. And, given how unlikely some some of the theoretical combinations appeared, the typology proves remarkably complete.
