The dictionary of the artificial interlingua UN
L (
Universal Networking Language), also called Universal Dictionary of UN
L Concepts (UNLD
C) is a part of an international project to develop UN
L , . The development of this resource is supported by the members of the “
U++ Consortium”, which unites researchers from Russia, France, Spain and India. Although UN
L is the main application of the resource, it also has certain value of its own and can be used for scientific and practical tasks not directly related to UN
L.
The basic units of the dictionary are so called UN
L concepts, which correspond to word senses described by traditional explanatory dictionaries. They are also similar to semanthemes in the Meaning ↔ 
Text theory by I. A. Melchuk, which includes deep syntax and semantic representations with many features in common with semantic graphs of UN
L. The notion of UN
L concept is well aligned with lexicographic tradition. This allows to reuse much of the natural language data already gathered by explanatory dictionaries and thesauri.
UNLD
C defines the inventory of concepts in U++ UN
L. Each concept receives a unique identifier called Universal Word (U
W) conforming to the U++ standard. Each new U
W should be added to the dictionary before being used in any UN
L encoded documents in order to maintain lexical compatibility between different software tools supporting generation of natural language text from UN
L. UNLD
C links U
Ws with words and expressions of natural languages that can be used to express corresponding concepts.
Development of lexical basis for the Universal Dictionary of UN
L Concepts The dictionary has three main parts:1. List of the U++ Universal Words (U
Ws),
2. Semantic network that links the U
Ws together,
3. Set of local dictionaries linking U
Ws with words and expressions of natural
languages.
Entries have links to external lexical and semantic resources, including internal dictionaries of several M
T systems. The U
Ws and their links to natural languages are annotated to keep track of their source, status and expected quality. All data is split into several complementing each other “volumes” to simplify maintenance. Each volume is stored in a separate file. Different volumes may be used to represent languages and alternative orthographies/dialects of the same language. Large groups of entries, such as domain terms or named entities, are split away into separate volumes too.
The general overview and full introduction to UNLD
C has been given in . In this paper we describe the results of our work done in 2012 to extend the lexical coverage of UNLD
C in Russian and integrate data for other natural languages provided by our partners.
2. Current state of the project
At the time of writing the total number of U
Ws in the dictionary has reached 2,880,661. There are seven local dictionaries of Russian, English, French, Hindi,
Spanish, Vietnamese and Malay. A considerable part of the semantic network is completed. The core of the semantic network — its ontological structure — is modeled on the basis of the SUM
O ontology .
The main priority is given to the core lexical part of UNLD
C, which covers most frequently used words of English and Russian, and some special semantic units corresponding to lexical functions, modal words and some closed class words. In addition to this part we develop separate extension volumes containing basic terminology and named entities. The extensions are still at an early stage and contain only automatically gathered data. Table 1 shows, how many U
Ws are there in each part.
Part U
W number File Status
General lexics 82,804 CommonUNLdict-XM
L-0.04.1-alpha.tar.
bz2Downloadable
Terminology 688,617 CommonUNLdict-CSV
Terminology-0.02.
tar.bz2
Under development
Named Entities 2,109,240 CommonUNLdict-CSV-NamedEntities-0.01.tar.bz2
Soon to be released
Dikonov V. G. principle approach to the development of the resource is accumulation and integration of data available in the Internet with subsequent proofreading and gap filling. The initial versions of the local dictionaries are built using automated methods of import and cross-linking of different sources. The preferred sources are more reliable ones, such as translation dictionaries, or semantically annotated resources (
Wordnets, ontologies, other UN
L dictionaries). Since every resource contains some errors and automatic integration tends to multiply them, we have to to put a lot of effort into finding and fixing the resulting “noise”. It is planned that all automatically gathered data will eventually be proofread. However, the manual verification process is far too labor and time consuming to be applied to all the data. Therefore, proofreading is done only for the most important parts of the resource. Some errors are detected by applying formal criteria. For example, if an U
W is linked to words of several languages, but no translation dictionary confirms that these words are good translation equivalents of each other, we can suspect that some of the word ↔ U
W links are wrong and lower their reliability score. Another way to sift through the data automatically is to check if the semantic argument frame manually ascribed to the U
W matches its taxonomic class in the associated ontology and if both are compatible with any external semantic annotations linked to the corresponding words of natural languages.
2.1. Local Dictionaries
The existing local dictionaries are not equal in size and quality. They have been built using different approaches and from different data. The most interesting part is the general lexics part, because it is being proofread by hand. Table 2 quotes the number of U
Ws with translations by language and dictionary part with rough quality estimation.
expressions of natural languages in early 2013Language
General lexics Terminology Names Total
Quality estimation
English 82,804 (40,894 words)688,617 2,109,240 2,880,661 *****
Russian 48,555 (30,818 words)688,613 226,595 963,763 **** Manual proofreading in progress
French 36,324 (25,068 words)103,060 367,888 507,272 *** Automatic
verification
Hindi 27,815 (30,220 words)0 10,823 38,638 *** Automatic
verification
Spanish 11,758 (6,983 words)21,990 298,674 332,422 ** Experimental
Malay 21,861 (17,457 words)0 46,044 67,905 ** Experimental
Vietnamese 5,927 (6,456 words)0 171,367 177,294 *** Experimental
Development of lexical basis for the Universal Dictionary of UN
L Concepts 2.2. Volumes of general lexics
The English general lexics volume was built from the Princeton Wordnet 2.1 as a result of the work done by the Spanish UN
L center. English is used to form
the majority of U
Ws, so almost all U
Ws links to some English words or phrases. The Wordnet data were supplemented with new U
Ws standing for semantically non-void prepositions and conjunctions and some phrasal verbs. 13,811 U
Ws representing lexical senses of 6,723 English words were rewritten or created by hand. Those changes concerned the most frequent English words. Further, manual changes were made in about 5,000 predicate U
Ws to fix bad argument frame descriptions. The general English local dictionary does not contain all of the Wordnet. We rejected all multiword expressions from Wordnet and chose about 40,000 most frequent words to facilitate linking to the internal dictionary of the
ETA
P-3 M
T system.
The Russian general volume 0.05-alpha registers over 48,000 senses of 30,800 Russian words. It is being gradually improved by the author through proofreading and adding new data. It still includes only those Russian words and word senses (with very few exceptions) that serve as translations of already existing English Wordnet senses. This happens due to the nature of the process used to construct the initial version of the Russian dictionary and the necessity to a) clean up the unavoidable errors before adding more specifically Russian lexical data and b) to maximize the percentage of U
Ws that have translations into all supported natural languages. The next version 0.06 is going to include Russian words that lack direct single word translations into English. The examples include such common words as старик (old man), касса (cash register), телевизор (T
V set), молчать (keep silence), белеть (*be seen as white), приходить (come on foot), historic and cultural phenomena, e.g. самовар (samovar), щи (cabbage soup), лапоть (peasants’ shoe), хохлома (khokhloma), почерному (house without a chimney), etc.
The French volume has been built automatically on the basis of the free French Wordnet WOL
F 0.1.5 . It includes only those French words that were linked to the Princeton Wordnet synsets, the members of which had matching U
Ws in the subset forming the core of UNLD
C. The WOL
F data were supplemented by the lexical data provided by the French UN
L center and further ranked through automatic comparison of the resulting possible French
Russian translations with regular French
Russian dictionaries.
The Hindi volume is made from the UN
L dictionary supplied by the Center For Indian Language Technology at the Indian Institute of Technology in Mumbai. It can be expanded using the existing open Hindi Wordnet.
The Spanish volume is based on the small public Spanish Wordnet.
The Malay and Vietnamese volumes are the results of experiments in assimilating lexical data from regular translation dictionaries. We developed tools that can automatically pair the already registered UN
L concepts with words/symbols or expressions of arbitrary natural language taken from dictionaries that translate them into the already supported natural languages, e.g. English, Russian and French.
Dikonov V. G. Links to external resources
UNLD
C is being built using data from other open resources and can in turn become a source of data for other projects. The links with external resources are important to enable easy exchange of linguistic data. The U
Ws in UNLD
C are connected with Princeton Wordnet 2.1 and 3.0, Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUM
O) , Db
Pedia Ontology. Table 3 shows the number of existing links. More external resources may be added to this list in future.
Part U
W number Connected with
General 77,671 77,293
Princeton Wordnet 2.1 и 3.0SUM
O ontology
Terminology allpart
Upper SUM
O classes (not reliable) Domain ontologies
Named entities all Db
Pedia ontology
Upper SUM
O classesU
Ws and Russian, English, French and Hindi words also have pointers to the entries of internal dictionaries of linguistic processors supporting those languages. Such connections are needed to convert UN
L semantic graphs to text in different languages. The Russian local dictionary links 40,175 U
Ws with 26,188 entries of the Russian combinatorial dictionary used by the ETA
P-3 system. of links between parts of UNLD
C and external resources.
The ontology pictured in Fig. 1 is our custom OW
L rendering of SUM
O. It does not include complex axioms from SUM
O due to the differences in expressivity between KI
F and OW
L languages. The method of producing the OW
L version permits periodic synchronization with SUM
O and custom changes in the resulting ontology. The ontology is used to form the ontological part of the semantic network connecting all UN
L concepts. This part is under active development.
2.4. Data files
The data files are public and can be downloaded under GP
Lv3+ and Creative Commons CC-BY-S
A. Currently the data is provided in two formats: simple tab separated tables CS
V and XM
L for uploading into the lexical database Jibiki/
Pivax , which can be used as an online search tool. It is also planned to add the RDF/
Turtle format conforming to the Semantic Web Linked Data principle. The released data files are available at http://atoum.imag.fr/geta/
User/services/pivax/data/. The currently available files include two out of three main parts of the dictionary: the list of concepts (unlvolume) and loacal dictionaries (rusvolume, fravolume, engvolume etc.).
Development of lexical basis for the Universal Dictionary of UN
L Concepts 3. Some features
Each U
W in UNLD
C has a special mark showing which language motivated its creation. If it is discovered that translations of the same U
W into different languages display subtle differences in meaning or connotations and the conflict is not resolved by ontology, or the ontological classification itself is doubtful, the specified language becomes the final reference.
3.1. Levels of semantic affinity
The dictionary structure allows to distinguish full and quasi synonyms. A single U
W may have several translations into the same natural language that are supposed to be full synonyms. For example, the U
W hydroplane(icl>airplane>thing,equ>seaplane) is linked to two Russian words гидроплан and гидросамолет with exactly the same meaning. If two words are not interchangeable in most contexts, they should be connected to different U
Ws. The U
Ws themselves should than be linked by a synonymy link “equ”. Most of the existing synonymy links were imported from Princeton Wordnet. Unlike the Wordnet, groups of synonyms are not treated as units representing one common meaning. Synset members are considered quasisynonyms, unless the opposite is proven. For example, the U
Ws hydroplane(icl>airplane>thing,equ>seaplane) and seaplane(icl>airplane>thing) can be merged together, if it turns out that in all languages but English they receive identical translations.
Dikonov V. G. Special U
Ws
Usually in order to translate a concept into a natural language one only needs to check, what words are linked to the U
W in the local dictionary. However, there are special categories of U
Ws, which are hard or impossible to translate in the regular way. First of all, it concerns the U
Ws standing for abstract concepts known as Lexical Functions (L
F). The dictionary contains some U
Ws equivalent to “collocate” type L
Fs. They may be used to avoid faulty literal interpretation of certain idiomatically used words. For example, the current version of our UN
L semantic analyzer renders words take and have in I took a short walk and I had a short rest as a special U
W perform_an_action(icl>do,agt>thing,obj>process), which corresponds to the abstract meaning of the lexical function OPE
R1. Its translation into other languages depends on the L
F’s argument and may be empty. Compare Russian translations Я немного прогулялся (
I walked a little) and Я слегка отдохнул (
I rested a little).
Another group of U
Ws that are hard to correlate with individual words of natural languages is modal predicates. These U
Ws are parallel to UN
L modal attributes used to encode modality and constitute a well organized system described in . In many languages, including English and Russian, words used to express modality are polysemic and represent different modal meanings in different contexts. In UN
L the same modal attribute or U
W is used to encode a given modality regardless of what modal word was used in the source sentence. E.g. the prohibition in You may not carry a weapon here and You can not smoke onboard is expressed by two different modal verbs but in UN
L the same symbol is used to represent both. The dictionary will link the special modal U
W grant-not(icl>modal>be,obj>uw,aoj>thing) to both can not and may not leaving the choice between them to the processor or the user.
3.3. Multiword expressions
Concepts may be translated into some languages by multiword phrases and/or grammar constructions with a variable part. The target language expression may be written not only in the form of a simple n-gram, but also include syntactic relations between the words following the notation of the M
T system that is supposed to support the target language. For example, the U
W bathroom(icl>room>thing) is translated into French as the phrase salle de bain, which has the structure recorded in the format of the French M
T system Ariane as: @@_1:’salle’ (2:’bain’)::1 ‘’: CAT(CATN),GNR(FEM),N(N
C). 2 ‘’:CAT(CATN),GNR(MA
S), N(N
C), NUM(PL
U), ART(AB
S), RSUNL(MO
D).
In addition to recording the phrase structure in the formats understood by specific M
T systems, UNLD
C may use a more general format similar to the text form of UN
L graphs. In such case the U
Ws are replaced with corresponding words of the target natural language. The words are linked with UN
L semantic relations and carry UN
L attributes. This option is already used in the terminological part of the dictionary. A UN
L-capable system should be able to convert such phrase into a fragment of its own internal representation, if applicable. For example, the Russian verb белеть in Белеет парус одинокий must be translated into English by grammatic constructions Development of lexical basis for the Universal Dictionary of UN
L Concepts with a variable: A white (lonely sail) can be seen/
There is a white (lonely sail)/
A white (lonely sail) appears (at …). Here the brackets contain a variable N
P which cannot be omitted. The English local dictionary might contain the following record: mod(concrete_thing(icl>thing).@indef.@topic,white), obj(see.@entry.@ability, concrete_thing(icl>thing).@indef.@topic),which corresponds to a white … can be seen. The U
Ws in bold instead of words describe the general class uniting the words that could be inserted into the specified slots to build a good translation.
4. Comparable resources
The most important resources similar to UNLD
C are the Wordnet family with “
Inter Language Index” as a whole and parallel projects building dictionaries for other flavors of UN
L. There are two major alternative UN
L resources: the dictionary of UN
L Development Center developed under the lead of Hiroshi Uchida and UN
Larium dictionaries. All of them collect multilingual lexical data and provide some semantic annotation.
4.1. Other UN
L dictionaries
The UN
L Development Center (UND
C) dictionary, http://www.undl.org/unlexp/ was built by automatic corpus mining using methods common among the developers of statistical and example-based M
T systems. This is confirmed by the existence of a large number of characteristic errors. The method does not take into account morphological features and in the case of languages with rich morphology, such as Russian, that dictionary resorts to crude approximation techniques trying to discover lemmas. As a result, the UND
C dictionary contains a lot of wrong lemmas and false translations. There are some differences in the U
W formation standards too. UND
C permits U
Ws consisting of bare English headwords without any constraints that would disambiguate their meaning. The U++ U
Ws always include some ontological constraints and list arguments of predicates.
The second UN
L resource — UNL
Arium UN
Ldic (http://www.unlweb.net/unlarium/) is based on the Wordnet and we would criticize it for using numerical synset codes form Wordnet directly as U
Ws to identify concepts. The numbers merely refer to the size of the offset in bytes from the beginning of a Wordnet data file to the start of the synset record. They change between versions of Princeton Wordnet. Sticking to the numbers would severely limit the range of possible concepts in the resource, so UN
Larium supplements them with proper U
Ws for concepts not directly linkable to the Wordnet. UN
Ldic is license compatible and it is relatively easy to exchange data between our projects.
Dikonov V. G. Lexical networks
UNLD
C contains a lot of data imported from Princeton Wordnet and reuses its synonymy and antonymy links. Even parts that were left out may be imported later. However even the English section of UNLD
C is not an exact copy of the Wordnet and includes some new data, in particular the description of prepositions and conjunctions. More differences between UNLD
C and Wordnet were described in .
Local dictionaries of other languages, e.g. French or Spanish, can be created from open Wordnets of those languages. The data contained in UNLD
C and other linked resources together makes up a superset of a typical Wordnet. It is possible to generate new Wordnets from UN
L data. For example, there is still no open and free Russian Wordnet that would be larger than 30,000 words. The already existing semantic and ontology relations make it possible to join registered Russian words into synsets and form a new open Russian Wordnet. The French local dictionary might fill in some gaps in WOL
F, etc.
There are other projects of multilingual lexical networks consisting of words and translation links between them. Such projects usually lack semantic annotation, but their data can be used to extend the coverage of the semantic dictionary. One example is the Pan
Lex project . There are several Internet sites offering croudsourced multilingual dictionaries, e. g. Wiktionary, freedict, etc. All of them collect potentially useful data that can be used in future.
The existence of other projects aiming to integrate lexical data available in the Internet, e. g. Babel
Net proves a widespread interest and importance of resource integration for the development of applied linguistics.
