In recent years the Internet has became significant „meeting place“ for all kind of languages, social groups,nations. Being founded in US
A with major language English it has succeeded in world-wide technological revolution andgiven new meaning to the phrase „intercultural communication“. Statistics extremely rapid growth of Internetusage in non
English regions, for example in Middle East in period 2000-2007 the growth has been 920.2 %.
Since the very beginning of Internet access virtual communities have existed. The technical base of communityhas changed through the years (bulletin boards, telnet chatrooms, multi-user dungeons, mailing lists, forums, massivemultiplayer online role-playing games, social networking sites etc), but the living force of communities appearing in allkinds of environments shows the growing demand of communication and belonging between Internet users.
Virtual communities generally act as the communities of practice. Communities of practice, concept worked outby Etienne Wenger, are „groups of people who share a concern or a passion for something they do and learn how to doit better as they interact regularly“ . This may be not intentional, but appear as a coeffect of other communication purposes. In online dating environments these purposes may be quite personal at the first sight – finding suitable partner,promoting yourself, building image of success. Still there is tendency for evolving communities with some collectiveidentity and non-written communication rules. By Wenger communities of practice have produced a shared repertoire of communal resources – language, routines, sensibilites, artifacts, tools, stories, styles, and so forth. To be competent is to have access to this repertoire and to be able to use it appropriately. So in such environments language use is thecompetence to be learned and developed. Textual communication is pivotal to understanding virtual communities, for itis the means for participants of those virtual environments to create, affirm, or change shared meaning and culture .
2. Material and method. Interculturality in Estonian portal rate.ee
Community of practice to be analysed is the user base of the most popular Estonian communication websiterate.ee, which was started in 2002 as a picture rating portal (comparable to Hotornot.com), but nowadays acts as a multifunctional full-featured web environment with options of weblog, gallery, chatroom, gaming corner and news feed. It’sinterface is only Estonian, so it is mainly used by inhabitants of Estonia who have gained at least some knowledge of
Estonian language. Though rate.ee’s userbase is Estonian-centered, the community is still multilingual. During the lastcensus in Estonia native language was Estonian for 921,817 inhabitants of the country, Russian for 406,755 inhabitants, Ukrainian for 12,299 inhabitants, Belorussian for 5,197 inhabitants, Finnish for 4,932 inhabitants and Latvian for1,389 inhabitants. It is difficult to say exact amount or percentage of Russians in rate.ee as there is no field for nationality, but language skills give us some sense of it. In statistics of rate.ee % of users have declared their Estonian
skill as „very good“ and 20 % of users give the same rating to their Russian skill. In general 90 % of users have at leastsome knowledge of Estonian and 67 % have at least some knowledge of Russian.
Труды международной конференции «Диалог 2008»602
* This work is supported by the ET
F grant no 6147.
093-Oja_A:_
Layout 1 15.05.2008 23:02 Page 602
Author has participated in rate.ee community since its beginning in 2002, since 2006 in role of moderator (poweruser with moderating abilities). Moderator has better overview of userbase and communication trends, accepting or rejecting new pictures, helping users with their problems and removing users with incorrect data.
Texts to be analysed are picture comments (public text) from rate.ee. Often the picture viewer does not check theprofile of picture owner, so he/she gets the information about ethnicity/language skills in other ways: from language usedin picture signature, from comments of other commentators and picture owner’s responses, sometimes from username orpicture context.
The selection of language material is made of 1) comments posted by probable Russians to probable Estonians,2) comments posted by probable Estonians to probable Russians and 3) comments posted by probable Russians to probable Russians, but in Estonian. The determiners of nationality in this context are language skills defined by users themselves (for example „
Russian – very good, English – intermediate, Estonian – poor“), names (generally Estonian and
Russian names differentiate clearly), school information (
Estonian or Russian school), language used to describehim/herself, language used in weblog, language used for commenting others. For analysis were chosen 150 user accounts that fitted restrictions mentioned before.
The comments will be analysed and compared to see the general and special features in different language situations. This helps to define environmental language details that may have been learned from each other in interlingualcommunication and the ones that are universal or depending more on situation than environment.
Analysis is limited to available information: it is possible that some users play with identity or that their real-lifeidentity is multilingual (for example in bilingual and -national families), the language proficiency is also defined by user,so there exists a chance that it is overrated or underestimated. Anyway, we can only relay on available data, consideringthe chance that background information may be somewhat invalid or inprecise. Still the information is quite valid as thecommunity regulates itself. Estonia is small country and people know each other quite well, so when somebody defaceshis/her data, quite soon somebody notices it and informs the moderators of the site. Being in the role of moderator, theauthor has received many such complaints and always asked for reason to complain. More common answers have beenof type „
I would like to be moderator, too“ (to get the virtual honour and power), „
I have correct data myself and I wantother users to be honest, too“ and „he/she is lying, there is no such person in our class/village/etc, I couldn’t stand it“.
When moderators get information about fake account or fake data, the account will be closed. It means that the owner ofaccount loses all his/her messages, contacts, virtual reputation, membership of private clubs and social network. He/shecan create new account, but it takes time to restore all his/her virtual „life“. There is one more reason to present correctdata: people looking for real-life relations want to meet others face-to-face and for that they have to present „real self“to avoid embarrassing meetings. This topic has been discussed in rate.ee forum and youngsters tell, that they better present their (almost) real presence in rate.ee to get real friends.
3. Analysis
The conditions of choosing one or another language were examined. In most cases, when commentator and thepicture’s owner were not acquainted, the commentator tried to use the language of preliminary comments.
(1) ilus oled :) from: male, 21, Russian very good, Estonian: intermediate, English: intermediateto: female, 16, Russian: very good, Estonian: intermediate, English: intermediate
Previous comments, written by Estonians in Estonian: kaunitar!!! (k) täiiega armas If he/she was not familiar with that language, then mainly English was used. While responding to comment, thepicture’s owner tried to use same language or when he/she was not familiar with that language, he/she used English orresponded with emoticon or some very common short neutral and polite word (for example tnx, shortened version ofcombination of Estonian tänan (meaning thanks) and English thanks.
(2) Ouuuch, My godnesssss....you are soo Pretty!!!!)response: no, you are!from: female, 16, Russian: very good, Estonian: very goodto: male, 15, language skills undefined, but studying in Estonian school and having Estonian name
Sometimes the disorientation appeared, when comment included more than one language.
(3) t6 samaja samaja ,,iludus-. response: Tänan sind;) from: male, 16, Russian: very good, Estonian: poorto: female, 16, language skills undefined, but commenting others only in Russian)
Choosing language in internet conversation between Russians and Estonians603
093-Oja_A:_
Layout 1 15.05.2008 23:02 Page 603
There was also one interesting correction: commentator used firstly Estonian, then probably noted other comments in Russian and after one minute wrote second comment in Russian with generally same meaning.
(4) oilt on paris seksikas.kuid voiks seal olla rohkem sartsu. After one minute: fotka seks.no tam egoto ne hvataet.tebe nado bolo bo bolse fantaziifrom: male, 18, language skills: Russian:very good, Estonian: very goodto: female, 16, language skills: Russian: very good, Estonian: poor
In some cases the first comment was in non-native language of picture’s owner, then response was very neutral(emoticon or just one word) and the next comment was already given in native language. It is possible, that neutralresponse indicates communication breakdown, gives a signal to change the communication code.
Some users responded only to comments produced in their native language, ignoring foreign-language comments.
This silence normally ends the conversation, as the first commentator does not get any encouragement. Neutral answer,on the contrary, still leaves the possibility of following discussion, even when having no actual or positive meaning,whereas no answer is understood as negative, cancelling signal.
Commenting in non-native language tends to be shorter, more neutral and more unoriginal than commenting innative language. Such comments are typically 7p (seven points), 10p (ten points), super, wau, kena (pretty), lahe pilt(cool picture), klassnaja. English words and phrases are very common for both Estonians and Russians: nice, beautiful,best, sexy, sweet, cute, very cool, UR2GOO
D, nice pic. Such comments will get no or minimal polite response.
The length and contents of comment are also related to purpose of communication. In social network portals onequite widespread aim is to find partner. In rate.ee this is specially supported in environment as every userpage has arelationship status field and extra field for chosen one. One can set another user as his „chosen one“, and when that usersets him, too, they are displayed on each other’s pages. Having accepted „chosen one“ is so important, that even some7-year-olds have this slot filled.
For example test query of comments of male users in age 15-22 without girlfriend, commenting female users withopposite language proficiency gave more long comments than female users in age 15-22 with boyfriend, commentingmale users with opposite language proficiency. When communication had a purpose, the motivation was recognisablyhigh: dialogue was long, there were many mini-dialogues between users A and B and they managed to find a way tocommunicate – writing with mistakes, making copy-paste of other comments, combining languages:(5) oled vaga kaunitar(K
L)= from: male, 18, Russian: very good, Estonian: very goodto: female, 18, with Estonian name, studying in Estonian school
Once Estonian language was clearly used in response to give a sign of unwanted communication, to cancel communication in „polite way“:(6) ja tebe eshe i sovetov to ne daval :))))) gde ti moj sovet uvidela to?eto rekomendacii bili )) ja ne kazdomu4eloveku sovet daju ;)relax,it’s not so deep))))))))
response: Aitab spämmida siin :
D from: male, 21, Russian: very good, Estonian: intermediateto: female, 24, Russian: very good, Estonian: very good, usually writing in Russian4. Discussion
Background of language-political situation was intentionally ignored here as there are no sufficiently reliable statistical researches about cross-lingual and cross-cultural attitudes in Estonia. Still in analysed material there were noexamples of aggressive language attitudes like „speak my language!“ or „
I know your language, but I don’t want to speakit“. There is a chance that users, who never responded to comments in another language, may „protest“ in this way, butbased on their profiles it is more likely that they just did not understand the text and were not able to compose answer.
The indicators to assume it are 1) user’s language skills, for example Estonian is defined as „poor“, all information ispresented in Russian and user always comments others only in Russian, 2) living area and school, in some regions thelevel of teaching Estonian is still primitive and students are not able to get proper Estonian skills. Interviews show thatyoung Russians in Estonia are generally interested in learning Estonian, but for improving it they need Estonian-speaking environment .
Conversation situation affects the language choice a lot:1. what language is used in other comments?
2. do the commentator know the person he/she comments?
Anni Oja604
093-Oja_A:_
Layout 1 15.05.2008 23:02 Page 604
3. what is the purpose of text? Do the commentators hold long conversation and for example aim to get to know
each other, presenting themselves and proposing to meet in real life?4. is it comfortable to use this language: for commentator, for a person commented? Does the commentator want
to create comfortable or uncomfortable situation?
Environmental learning helps users to understand the inside rules of rate.ee language politeness:1) which vocabulary is accepted as neutral and neutral-positive?
2) what kind of response is suitable as „polite enough“?
3) how to cancel unwanted conversation in polite way, still making the cancellation clear?
In future it is possible to go more deep, creating subcorpus of interlingual communication in rate.ee and includingother nations and languages. Estonian
Russian code-switching has been often viewed from the (
Estonian) language teacher’s point of view (for example studies based on Estonian Interlanguage Corpus ). Still some studies view Russian’simpact on Estonian language, for example Tene Üprus has measured Russian accent in Estonian spontaneous speech anddiscovered that Estonians may adapt „
Russian accent“ to communicate more efficiently with Russians . Written
Internet communication does not give us much information about accent or learning, but at the same time helps to shinelight on general language trends in normal spontaneous conversations, providing huge text collection composed by language users themselves.
