Coreferential and bridging relations between discourse entities are of major importance for establishing and maintaining textual coherence. The ability to automatically resolve these kinds of relations is an important feature of text understanding systems. The Prague Dependency Treebank (PD
T 2.0) (
Jan Hajič et al., 2006) is a manually annotated corpus of Czech. The texts are annotated in three layers — morphological, analytical and tectogrammatical. The most abstract (tectogrammatical) layer includes among other mark-ups the annotation of coreferential links. The whole corpus contains almost 50 thousand sentences. In this paper we present an overview of the projects of annotating different types of coreference and bridging relations in the Prague Dependency Treebank, speak about the results of interannotator agreement and summarise some anaphora resolution experiments made on Czech data. Section 2 describes the state of the art concerning annotating, analysing and using coreferentially annotated corpora. Section 3 gives a short overview of the types of coreference and bridging relations annotated in PD
T. In Section 4, we give the statistics and discuss the results of inter-annotator agreement. Section 5 describes some anaphora resolution experiments that were made using the Czech coreferentially annotated data. We make conclusions in section 6.
Nedoluzhko A., Mírovský J., Novák M. PD
T coreference and similar projects
The experiments on anaphora resolution, referential choice prediction, etc. are made using the annotated corpora for coreference. There are a number of different large-scale annotated corpora for coreference and anaphoric relations on which the experiments for coreference resolution are made. The largest annotated corpora for English include MU
C (
Hirschman and Chinchor, 1997), AC
E (
Doddington et al., 2004), Onto
Notes (
Pradhan et al., 2007), GNOM
E (
Poesio, 2004), ARRA
U (
Poesio
and Artstein, 2008). The coreference annotations for other languages than English are more limited. The most well-known corpora including anaphoric informations are An
Cora (
Recasens and Marti, 2009) for Spanish and Catalan, VENE
X (
Poesio et al., 2004) for spoken and written Italian, the Italian Live Memories Corpus (
Rodríguez
et al., 2010), TüBA-D
Z Treebank (
Hinrichs et al., 2004) and Postdam Commantary Corpus (
Stede, 2008; Krasavina and Chiarcos, 2007) for German, PdiT
B (
Poláková et al., 2012) etc.
Determining coreference is a highly complicated task, and even between human annotators there is a lot of disagreement leading to a relatively low number of interannotator agreement, especially concerning nominal coreference and bridging relations. The cases of vagueness and referential ambiguity were a subject of a rich discussion in computational linguistics and anaphoric community during the last few years. There were discussed such topics as e.g. justified sloppiness hypothesis in Poesio et al. 2006, the reliability of anaphoric annotation in Poesio and Artstein 2005, examples
and reasons for vagueness and referential ambiguity in Versley 2008, so-called nearidentity relation in Recasens et al. 2010. Some discussion on ambiguous cases of coreference and the reasons for inter-annotator disagreement for Czech were presented in Nedoluzhko 2010.
3. Types of coreference and bridging relations annotated in PD
T
In PD
T 2.0, two types of coreference (grammatical and textual) and six types of bridging relations have been annotated. The grammatical coreference typically occurs within a single sentence, the antecedent being able to be derived on the basis of grammar rules of a given language. It includes relative pronouns, verbs of control, reflexive pronouns, reciprocity and verbal complements. The detailed description of the types of grammatical coreference and the examples may be found in Mikulová et al. 2006.1 Textual coreference is generally taken to mean the use of various linguistic
means (pronouns, synonyms, generalizing nouns etc.) which function as anaphoric (occasionally cataphoric) reference devices. This reference is not expressed by grammatical means alone, but also via context. As for textual coreference in PD
T, it has been annotated in two time periods. At first, the so-called pronominal textual coreference was manually annotated. It was restricted to cases in which a demonstrative 1 The resumed typology of grammatical coreference in PD
T was also presented at DIALO
G
in Nedoluzhko 2009.
A coreferentially annotated corpus and anaphora resolution for Czech this or an anaphoric pronoun of the 3rd person, also in its zero form, are used (
Kučová and Hajičová, 2004). Afterwards, the annotation of textual coreference was extended to cases where the anaphor is expressed by other means such as full noun phrases (definite descriptions, repetitions, synonyms etc.), adverbs (there, then etc.) and some types of numerals and pronouns neglected in the first stage. This stage of the project was called the Extended Textual Coreference and described in detail during the annotation period in (
Nedoluzhko et al. 2009; Nedoluzhko, 2011; Nedoluzhko and Mírovský, 2011). Annotation of extended textual coreference and bridging relation is a project related to PD
T 2.5 (
Bejček et al., 2011), which is a revised, updated and extended version of PD
T 2.0.
The textual coreference is further classified into two types — coreference of N
Ps with specific (type SPE
C) or generic (type GE
N) reference. Compare examples (1) and (2):(1) Mary and John went together to Israel, but Mary to return because of the illness.
(2) Lions live in a forest. They are not vegetarians .
Special cases of textual coreference. Two special cases of reference are annotated in PD
T. First, the textual coreference covers the cases of endophoric references to discourse segment of more than one sentence, including also the cases where the antecedent is understood by inferencing from a broader co-text. This kind of relation has no explicitly marked antecedent, it just proves the fact that the given anaphoric N
P corefers with some discourse antecedent of more than one sentence. We consider this decision to be provisional and we plan to complete it later. Second, a specifically marked link for exophora denotes that the referent is “out“ of the co-text, it is known only from the actual situation. In the same way as for segments, the new nominal and adverbial links are being added. For the bridging relations, the following types are distinguished: part-of relation (room — ceiling), set — subset (students — some students) and FUNC
T (trainer — football team) traditional relations, CONTRAS
T for coherence relevant discourse opposites, ANA
F for explicitly anaphoric relations without coreference and the further underspecified group RES
T. The more detailed description of types can be found for example in Nedoluzhko and Mírovský 2011.
4. Statistics and inter-annotator agreement
By the end of 2011, the whole PD
T data was annotated for coreference and bridging relations (see Nedoluzhko et al. 2011).2 Table 1 shows the statistics of the annotated data.
2 The completed and corrected version was published together with the annotation of discourse relations in the Prague Discourse Treebank in 2012 (see Poláková et al. 2012).
Nedoluzhko A., Mírovský J., Novák M. number of sentences (in the annotated documents) 49,431
Total number of tokens 833,195
Number of coreferring nodes — grammatical coreference 23,272
Number of coreferring nodes — textual coreference 86,349
Number bridging relations 32,171% of co-referring nodes 17,6%
As for the distribution of types of textual coreference and bridging relations, the proportion is represented in Type Number
Textual coreference (specific) 20,243 (pronouns) + 50,593 (nouns) = 70,836
Textual coreference (generic) 3,095 (pronons) + 12,418 (nouns) = 15,513
All textual coreference links 86,349
All bridging links 32,171
As seen from the table, textual coreference makes the significant majority of the annotated relations and inside the group of textual coreference the coreference of specific noun phrases significantly prevail. The reason for relatively low percentage of bridging relations may be mainly the small number of types and their precise delimitating (even for annotation of the bridging relation of type RES
T, very precise rules were set). As for the significant dominance of textual coreference between specific noun phrases over generic ones, the reasons are mainly empiric. Also postulating coreference between generic noun phrases is a much more complicated task than coreferring specific noun phrases, so in most existing projects it is excluded from the annotation of coreference (
Poesio, 2004; Recasens, 2010 etc.). We have measured the inter-annotator agreement in the annotation of coreference and bridging anaphora in PD
T on a small part of the data that had been annotated in parallel by two annotators. To evaluate the agreement, we have used the chain-based F1-measure, a simple ratio, and Cohen’s κ (
Cohen, 1960). The chain-based F1-measure has been used for measuring the agreement on the recognition of a coreference or bridging relation, a simple ratio and Cohen’s κ have been used for measuring the agreement on the type of the relations in cases where the annotators recognized the same relation.
In the chain-based measure, we consider the annotators to be in agreement on recognizing a coreference or bridging relation if the two nodes connected by an arrow by one of the annotators have also been connected by the other annotator; coreference chains are taken into account, i.e. it is sufficient for the agreement if the arrow starts in or goes to a node that is coreferentially connected (possibly transitively) with the node used for the relation by the other annotator.
A coreferentially annotated corpus and anaphora resolution for Czech Measurement F1 Agreement on types Kappa on types All parallel data — coreference 0.72 0.90 0.73
All parallel data — bridging anaphora0.46 0.92 0.89
Table 3 shows that the results for inter-annotator agreement are not particularly high. In our measurements and analyses of inter-annotator agreement, we observe the three main types of disagreement: (a) disagreement concerning the decision if the relation in question should be annotated as a coreference (or bridging) relation, (b) disagreement on choosing the antecedent and (c) disagreement in the type of the annotated relation. The reasons for relatively low numbers of inter-annotator discrepancies and the typology of disagreements with the examples were discussed in Nedoluzhko 2010. 5. Automatic experience on the annotated data
The main objective of our annotation effort has been to provide data for developing automatic techniques for resolution of anaphoric relations. PD
T has served as a source of gold standard data for testing as well as a source of training data for tools utilizing machine learning methods.
Antecedents in grammatical coreference can be usually derived with high accuracy from grammatical rules. Nguy 2006 presented a set of rules for various types of grammatical coreference, achieving more than 90% F1-measure for every type.
In Nguy and Žabokrtský 2007, a rule-based system was employed to resolution of pronominal textual coreference. Higher complexity of this task affects the success rate which is substantially lower (74% F1-measure) than what can be reached in the task of grammatical coreference resolution. Applying machine learning methods, particularly perceptron ranking in Nguy et al. 2009, on the same task outperformed the rule-based method with F1-measure over 79%.
However, the features used in these experiments were extracted from the manually annotated tectogrammatical layer of PD
T 2.0. Thus the system could take advantage of perfectly correct information on various linguistic attributes which are not available in a real-world scenario. In Bojar et al. 2012, the authors used the same perceptron ranker and the same feature set for training and testing, this time extracted from the automatically analyzed data though. Unreliability of information on tectogrammatical gender and number as well as uncertainty of presence of a subject omitted on the surface3 resulted in a substantial drop in performance to 50% F1-measure.
It confirms that correct identification of an unexpressed subject and determination, whether it is anaphoric, is central to resolution of the zero variant of pronominal coreference. This and a corresponding issue in English — determination of whether a personal pronoun “it” is anaphoric — were addressed in the work of Veselovská et al. 2012 3 Czech is a pro-drop language.
Nedoluzhko A., Mírovský J., Novák M. a set of rules tested on Prague Czech
English Dependency Treebank 2.0 (PCED
T). Some of these rules made use of parallel nature of the treebank by providing information from the English side to facilitate identification of Czech unexpressed subjects. Annotation work on the Extended Textual Coreference project encouraged research on noun phrase (N
P) textual coreference resolution. Novák 2010 carried out the first experiments on N
P coreference in Czech. The approach of maximum entropy ranking was further elaborated in Novák and Žabokrtský 2011, where authors compared systems based on classification and ranking approaches in machine learning. As a result, the best system achieves 44.4% F1-measure on coreference with specific reference. Novák 2010 also paid his attention on coreference with generic reference as well as bridging relations of the type PAR
T. Despite the unsatisfying results, his work introduces a novel feature inspired by Hearst patterns (
Hearst, 1992) that is supposed to capture a PART-WHOL
E relation by exploiting a large morphologically annotated corpus.
Knowledge of anaphoric relations in a text can be crucial to solving more complex tasks. Multiple tools mentioned above have been integrated with a modular NL
P framework Treex (
Popel and Žabokrtský, 2010) that is used in various scenarios. For instance, the rules for resolving grammatical and pronominal textual coreference contribute on English to Czech translation in TectoM
T system (Žabokrtský et al., 2008). In addition, some of these tools and their counterparts for English helped to form both sides of the automatically annotated Czech
English parallel corpus Cz
Eng 1.0 (
Bojar et al., 2011), consisting of over 15 million sentence pairs.
The overview of performance of the tools mentioned above can be found in Type of the task Published Data
Success rate
Grammatical coreference, verbs of control Nguy 2006 PD
T 2.0 91.5%
Grammatical coreference, reflexive pronouns Nguy 2006 PD
T 2.0 97.1%
Grammatical coreference, relative pronouns Nguy 2006 PD
T 2.0 99.6%
Grammatical coreference, reciprocity Nguy 2006 PD
T 2.0 94.7%
Pronominal coreference, rule-based Nguy and Žabokrtský 2007PD
T 2.0 74.2%
Pronominal coreference, perceptron ranking, gold features
Nguy et al. 2009 PD
T 2.0 79.4%
Pronominal coreference, perceptron ranking, system features
Nguy et al. 2009 PD
T 2.0 50.3%
Identification of an anaphoric unexpressed subject, rule-based
Veselovská et al. 2012
PCED
T 2.0
61.5%
Identification of an anaphoric unexpressed subject, rule-based, expoliting English side
Veselovská et al. 2012
PCED
T 2.0
69.5%
N
P coreference, maximum entropy ranking
Novák 2010 PD
T 2.5 39.4%N
P coreference, perceptron ranking, improved features
Novák and Žabokrtský 2011PD
T 2.5 44.4%
A coreferentially annotated corpus and anaphora resolution for Czech 6. Conclusion and future work
We presented the finished project of the Czech annotation of different types of coreference and bridging relations. We compared our project to other similar projects, gave the statistics of coreference and bridging types and the results for inter-annotator agreement. We briefly presented the anaphora resolution experiments trained on coreferentially annotated corpus. At present, we are completing the annotation for the first and second person coreference. In future, other corpora for Czech (e.g. the Prague Dependency Treebank of Spoken Czech, Prague Czech
English Dependency Treebank) are to be supplied with some types of coreferential relations. Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support from the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (grants P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875) and GAU
K 4226/2011.
