At first glance, the construction дело в том, что appears to present no difficulty for translation into other languages. It seems to possess complete compositionality, and even its literal translation is confirmed in the parallel corpora. Cf. the following examples from Russian
English (1), Russian
German (2) and Russian
Swedish parallel corpora.2(1) Дело в том, что редактор заказал поэту для очередной книжки журнала большую антирелигиозную поэму. thing was that the editor had—commissioned from the poet a long antireligious poem for the next issue of his journal. (2) Ну, все равно, вы простите меня, — продолжал он, — но дело в том, что это ужасно, ужасно, ужасно! gleichviel, nehmen Sie es mir nicht übel,—fuhr er fort,—aber die Sache ist eben die, daß das alles so entsetzlich, entsetzlich, entsetzlich ist! (3) Дело в том, что... в последнее время, когда бы я ни пытался... что бы я ни сказал, все ее выводит из себя ... как будто она вообще не хочет слушать. Как будто она орет на меня постоянно. И я не знаю почему. är den… när jag väl pratar blir hon otålig, som om hon egentligen inte ville höra. Det är som om hon är förbannad på mig och jag vet inte varför. The English expression the thing was that, the German die Sache ist die, daß and the Swedish saken är den are practically word-for-word translations of the Russian дело в том, что.
2. Research goals and data
The goal of the present study is to improve methods for contrastive corpus investigations. The following hypotheses will be tested on the basis of the materials of parallel corpora:(1) The Russian expression дело в том, что has a large number of various parallels in other languages, and the choice of each variant depends on specific contextual conditions.
(2) Despite its apparent simplicity, дело в том, что has a complex semantic structure. The configuration of semantic elements comprising the content plane of this construction is unique.
2 Examples (1) and (2) are from the parallel corpora of the RN
C, while example (3) comes
from the parallel corpus OPU
S2 Russian of the query system Sketch Engine.
The Discursive Construction дело в том, что and its Parallels in other Languages (3) The expression дело в том, что is language-specific with respect to at least one of its parameters.
The empirical data have been collected from the corpus query system Sketch Engine, subcorpus of parallel texts OPU
S2 Russian, which contains 307709872 tokens (15.02.2016); the Russian National Corpus (RN
C), Russian—
English, English—
Russian, Russian—
German and German Russian subcorpora of parallel texts.
3. Theory and methods
Analysis of the corpus data allows us to identify only the degree of variety in the means of translating a given expression into other languages. When one or another expression lacks a generally accepted standard context-independent translation equivalent, we can speak of an absence of systematic equivalents, i.e., a kind of non-equivalence. Whether such non-equivalence is connected with the category of languagespecificity remains an open question.3 Some interesting thoughts on this subject are presented in , where the following parameters of language-specificity are identified. The first parameter is connected with the number of languages which lack the given phenomenon. The more such languages are discovered, the more possible it is to consider the phenomenon language-specific. The second parameter consists in the specificity of their content aspect (including connotations, background components of meaning, etc.), from which it follows that the degree of distinctiveness of the semantic configuration of an expression is directly proportional to its degree of language-specificity. The third parameter is immediately connected with the second: the more distinctive the semantic configuration of a lexical unit, the more difficult it is to find an adequate translation equivalent of this unit in another language. Here, as Shmelev notes, it must be kept in mind that the object of translation is not individual words but texts, so that the translator can deviate from exact equivalence on the lexical level. Such deviations do not necessarily imply that the translated units are languagespecific. Nevertheless, it is natural to interpret the proposal of a large number of different translation equivalents as indicating the absence of a systematic equivalent. This allows us to measure quantitatively the degree of language-specificity in accordance with this third parameter, which is in fact at the focus of the present study. The method of our analysis is based on considerations presented in . What it essentially entails is determining how many translation equivalents exist for potentially language-specific lexical units and then evaluating their dispersion. The expedience of calculating dispersion as a means of determining the statistical value of the scatter is in need of further substantiation. Other statistical instruments may prove to be more adequate.
The Russian expression дело в том, что was submitted to Sketch Engine, and we searched OPU
S2 Russian for the construction and its translation equivalents 3 On language-specificity see .
Dobrovol’skij D., Pöppel L.
English, German and Swedish. Because there were very few parallel texts in all four languages, the search was done for each specific pair of languages: Russian and English, Russian and German, Russian and Swedish. We processed our findings manually to avoid information noise. The search system does not indicate from which or into which language a given context was translated. To ascertain the means by which the Russian construction дело в том, что is translated into other languages and the possibilities of this expression appearing in translation from other languages into Russian we used the parallel corpora of the Russian National Corpus (RNC)—English
Russian, Russian
English, German
Russian and Russian
German. Only the corpus query system Sketch Engine contains Swedish
Russian and Russian
Swedish corpora. Let us move on to our findings.
4. Results and discussion
We begin the discussion of results with a presentation of the English results in Sketch Engine. Cf. English parallels Frequencyzero equivalence 154the fact is (that) 123the thing is (that) 98the point is (that) 70(it’s/this/that is) because/because of 40it’s just (that)/it’s that/just/this is that 27in fact 26the truth is (that) 26however 16the fact of the matter is (that) 15indeed 13the problem is (that) 12you see 9the reason is (that) 8as a matter of fact 5for 5it’s/this is about 5it happens that/as it happened/what has happened is/what is happening is4 Single hits are not shown in any of the tables.
5 The tables do not take into account differences in verb tenses. The thing is (that), for example,
includes contexts with all other tense forms.
The Discursive Construction дело в том, что and its Parallels in other Languages English parallels Frequencythe matter is (that) 4but 4since 4it’s a fact that 4well 3basically 3what’s true is (that)/it was true (that) 3the consequence is (that) 3the truth of the matter is (that) 2the answer is (that) 2the concern is (that) 2the crux of the matter is (that) 2the question is (that) 2as 2you know 2look 2the position is (that) 2the thing about 2in effect 2
Besides the data presented in the table, more than 43 single English correlates of the construction дело в том, что were found: the situation is; that means that; my story is; the issue is; the reality is; the content is; the explanation is; the fact remained that; the fact that; this is due to; it has everything to do with; what I’m trying to say is that; except that; that is; in reality; actually; in practice; the word is; the plan was; here’s the thing; this is the situation; sort of; the point being; the purpose of; it is not that; thus; it should be noted that; in truth; for the reason that; as it was; rather; in that it is; that is; instead; namely; in that connection; in this regard; it is which; to be blunt; here too; it is a matter of; accordingly; the trouble is.
The first thing that stands out here is the large number of different English parallels of the Russian construction. In all we found 80 such equivalents.6 The second important feature is that of these 80, 43 occur only once, which indicates significant scattering in these English parallels.
Let us now turn to the Russian
English parallel corpus of the RN
C. Cf. 6 Some of them have been analyzed in .
Dobrovol’skij D., Pöppel L.
parallels Frequencyzero equivalence 27the fact is (that) 14the thing is (that) 14the point is (that) 10you see 3actually 2in point of fact 2the matter is (that) 2
In this corpus we found 26 translation equivalents, of which 18 occur only once. It is evident from the table that the results partly coincide and partly diverge. Four of the most frequent equivalents—zero equivalent, the fact is (that); the thing is (that) and the point is (that)—completely coincide, which indicates that the findings are non-random. At the same time, the relatively frequent constructions found in Sketch Engine—in fact; the truth is (that) and however—do not occur in the RN
C, but (it’s/this/that is) because/because of; it’s just (that)/it’s that/just/this is that and the fact of the matter is (that)—occur only once. These divergences are quite natural. Sketch Engine is much larger than the RN
C, while the RN
C is much cleaner. In addition, in Sketch Engine it is impossible to determine which language is the source language, and the texts in these corpora differ with respect to genre. The RN
C contains almost exclusively fictional texts, whereas non-fiction dominates in Sketch Engine.
Now for our analysis of the German materials. Cf. Tables 3 and 4.
German parallels Frequencyzero equivalence 19die Sache ist die (dass) 8aber 5es geht darum, dass 4es ist (doch) so, dass 3die Wahrheit ist, dass 3wissen Sie 2nur (dass) 2
Tatsache ist (nun mal) 2es ist nur (dass) 2ich meine 2der Punkt ist 2
The Discursive Construction дело в том, что and its Parallels in other Languages German parallels Frequencydie Sache ist die (dass) 18zero equivalence 11nämlich 9es handelt sich darum, dass 3die Hauptsache ist, (dass) 3doch 2der Grund (war, dass) 2es kommt (vielmehr/doch nur) darauf an 2
Although the Russian
German materials are considerably smaller in scope, the results exhibit tendencies similar to those observed in the English materials. In Sketch Engine we found 20 German parallels and in the RN
C 13, some of which coincide and some do not. Two of the most frequent parallels in Sketch Engine—zero equivalent and die Sache ist die (dass)7—coincide with the most frequent ones in the RN
C, although in reverse order. The most important difference is the absence of nämlich in Sketch Engine, whereas in the RN
C it occurs 9 times. This difference is significant because even a superficial analysis of the word nämlich shows that its communicative function is very close to that of the Russian construction дело в том, что. On the whole, the German parallels in Tables 3 and 4 display considerable scatter. What most convincingly argues that дело в том, что is non-equivalent with respect to German is the partial absence of a translation equivalent in the parallel texts.
Table 5 shows the data from Sketch Engine, which is the only corpus of texts at our disposal containing Swedish parallels.
Swedish parallels Frequencyzero equivalence 45saken är den att 16men 8problemet är att 7faktum är att 4det viktiga är (att)/det är viktigt att 4det är för att 4sanningen är att 3grejen är den att 3poängen är att 3för (att) 3det handlar om att 27 For analysis of die Sache ist (dass) cf. .
Dobrovol’skij D., Pöppel L.
parallels Frequencydet vad jag vill säga är att 2i själva verket 2jag/han menar att 2
We found 25 Swedish parallels, the most frequent of which—zero equivalent and saken är den att—once again testify to a certain non-translatability of the Russian expression дело в том, что. In the intermediate zone (from 2 to 13) there are 13 equivalents, 10 equivalents are used only once. Here as well we can speak of considerable scatter; that is, relative to Swedish the construction дело в том, что is difficult to translate.
Shmelev out that for determining the language-specificity on the basis of the parameter of non-equivalence, the parallel corpora in which the language of the expression under analysis is the target rather than the source language have the best diagnostic potential. The appearance of such words is evidently the unconscious solution of the translator as a native speaker. For that reason we turned to the English
Russian and German
Russian parallel corpora of the RN
C. Cf. Tables 6 and 7.
English parallels Frequencyzero equivalence 38the fact is (that) 36for 34it’s just (that)/it’s that/just/this is that 16(that is) because 14(as) you see 11well 7the thing is (that) 7but 5it happens (that) 4actually 4the truth is (that) 4the point is (that) 4in fact 4the reason is (that) 3the problem is (that) 2
I mean 2as a matter of fact 2
I tell you 2in truth 2to begin with 2
The Discursive Construction дело в том, что and its Parallels in other Languages The English
Russian corpus shows even greater scatter among the English equivalents of дело в том, что: in all, there are 54 different translations, of which 6 equivalents occur more than 10 times each, 15 are found in the range from 2 to 10 times, and 33 occur only once. It is reasonable to compare these findings with those from the Russian
English parallel corpus of the RN
C (
Table 2), since they are basically comparable. The corresponding results from this corpus are as follows: 3 are used more than 10 times each, 5 in the range from 2 to 10 times, and 18 occur only once. Of the most frequent equivalents, only two—zero equivalent and the fact is (that)—coincide. Our assumption that translators from Russian to English most often follow the form of the original, using constructions such as fact is (that); the thing is (that) and the point is (that), is fully corroborated. Translators from English to Russian, on the other hand, more often employ the language-specific expression whenever it is not dictated by form. Thus the most frequent group in Table 6 includes lexical units such as for, just, because, you see. In addition, syntactic means such as cleft sentences are also used. Cf. (4).
(4) They didn’t believe me at first either, he said. It’s just that we get a lot of calls like this. But I believe you, Doctor, so why don’t you continue with the story? тоже мне сначала не верили,—промолвил Гийо.—Дело в том, что мы получаем много подобных звонков. Но я верю вам, доктор, и, прошу, продолжайте. A comparison of the German
Russian and Russian
German parallel corpora of the RN
C produces very similar findings. Cf. Table 7 and Table 4 above.
German parallels Frequencynämlich 27zero equivalence 11die Sache ist die, (dass) 10denn 8eben 3aber 3es kommt darauf an 2
The following features stand out. The formal correlate die Sache ist die, (dass) dominates in translations from Russian to German, while in the German
Russian corpus the word nämlich often correlates with дело в том, чтo although their formal structures have nothing in common. This confirms what was stated earlier. Cf. (5).
(5) Wir landeten, und—die ganze Insel bestand aus einem großen Käse. Wir hätten dies vielleicht gar nicht entdeckt, wenn uns nicht ein sonderbarer Umstand auf die Spur geholfen hätte. Es war nämlich auf unserm Schiffe ein Matrose, der eine Dobrovol’skij D., Pöppel L.
Antipathie gegen den Käse hatte. выяснилось, весь остров представлял собой большой сыр. Возможно, мы даже не заметили бы этого, если бы не одно обстоятельство, открывшее нам истину. Дело в том, что у нас на корабле находился матрос, отроду испытывавший отвращение к сыру. Another feature of the German
Russian corpus is that the group of relatively frequent parallels includes the causal word denn, which is similar to the English conjunctions because and for in the English
Russian corpus.
5. Conclusion
The study advanced three hypotheses, each of which may be considered confirmed. The data presented in the investigation show that the construction дело в том, что has many different English, German and Swedish translation equivalents. It is important to note that most of these equivalents are not synonymous among themselves, which means that the choice of one or another of them depends not on the subjective preferences of the translator, but on contextual factors. Following from this as well is the fact that the construction дело в том, что has a complex semantic configuration that is unique relative to English, German and Swedish. The semantic structure of дело в том, что includes at least the following meanings: 1) substantiation of something stated previously; 2) indication of the reason something has happened; 3) emphasis on the special significance of the following clause. Equivalents from the various groups are selected depending on which meaning is being highlighted in the utterance. This can be illustrated with the following examples from Sketch Engine and the RN
C.
1) English you see in Дело в том, что это ваша мать—
You see, it’s your
mother), German nämlich in Дело в том, что она была значительно старше меня—
Sie war nämlich bedeutend älter als ich or Swedish det var så att in Det var så att jag råkade kalla henne subba—Дело в том, что я случайно назвал ее кошелкой. Russian дело в том, что not only substantiates previous statements but also indicates the reason in each statement and emphasizes the significance of the following clause.
2) Causal conjunctions and constructions such as English (it is) because, the reason is that, German denn, and Swedish för. In the following examples English it is because, Swedish för and German denn indicate the reason for something that has been stated in the previous utterance: То есть, дело в том,
что я — женщина!—
So it is because I’m a woman; Отличная книга. Её должен прочесть каждый. Видишь ли, дело в том, что если мы будем беспечны…—
Gutes Buch. Jeder sollte es lesen. Denn, weißt du, es geht darum, wenn wir nicht aufpassen…; Может быть, вы поможете мне... дело в том, что мне очень нужно с ним встретиться. Du kanske kan hjälpa mig, för det är viktigt att jag får tag i honom.
The Discursive Construction дело в том, что and its Parallels in other Languages 3) Focusing particles and constructions such as English the point is, the thing is,
German eben, die Sache ist die, (dass) or Swedish saken är den att, poängen är den att. English the point is that in Дело в том, что этот противник никогда не отступает—
The point is that this enemy never retreats; German was die Hauptsache ist in Но дело в том, что Анну я вам не отдам—
Aber was die Hauptsache ist: ich lasse auf Anna nichts kommen; and Swedish poängen är att in Нет, но дело в том, что искушение всегда остается—
Nej, men poängen är att frestelsen alltid är där focus on the importance of what is said. Russian дело в том, что does not only focus the following clause but conveys other meanings as well—substantiation and indication of the reason.
The uniqueness of the semantic and conceptual configuration determining the meaning of the construction testifies to its language-specificity relative to the languages examined here. The findings of this and similar studies can be useful not only in developing the theory of language specificity but also in lexicography, translation and pedagogy. What we consider to be our primary accomplishment is that we have succeeded in outlining a new approach to working with parallel corpora in contrastive corpus investigations.
