The task of speech synthesis or text-to-speech (TT
S) is to convert a written text to sounds. The quality of a speech synthesizer is judged by its similarity to the human voice and by its ability to be understood, i. e. the quality of synthetic speech depends primarily on two main factors: its intelligibility and naturalness. It is possible to say that the problem of intelligibility for speech synthesis is already solved . Extensive research in the field of speech synthesis during the last few decades allowed synthetic speech to sound quite natural, and its characteristics come close to those of human speech.
At present the two main and most popular methods of natural-sounding speech synthesis are unit selection concatenative synthesis and so-called hidden Markov model (HM
M) synthesis based on statistic models.
Unit selection synthesis based on determining the best sequence of candidate units from a speech corpus. Then these candidates are concatenated Evaluation of naturalness of synthesized speech with different prosodic models to form the resulting words and sentences. This process may be followed by modification of prosodic features of units (duration, energy and pitch) to match prescribed values.
HM
M-based TT
S is also called statistical parametric synthesis. A TT
S system of this type models frequency spectrum, fundamental frequency (pitch) and duration of speech by HM
M and then generates speech waveforms directly from HM
M based on the maximum likelihood criterion . Although HM
M TT
S provides an easy way to modify voice characteristics, speech generated without natural units usually sounds less natural than unit selection synthesis. This is the reason why we use unit selection in our TT
S system.
However, naturalness of speech depends not only on segmental quality. Prosodic features including pitch, duration and energy and the way of achieving their required values are by no means less important. There are several approaches to the task . In the next sections we consider two ways to obtain them which are used in our Vital
Voice Russian TT
S system .
2. Rule-based approach
The first approach is rule-based. It consists of two steps. During the first step we define the intonation type of the phrase (i.e. syntagma) and the word bearing the nuclear pitch accent depending on punctuation, parts of speech of words in the phrase and presence of special trigger words (question words, conjunctions, etc.). This is performed by manually constructed rules. It is worth mentioning that phrase boundaries are already defined at this stage . At present we have six intonation types that are reliably derived from the text: completeness, incompleteness, general and special questions and two types of exclamations. This is a reduced set of types from .
At the second stage (after phonetic transcription) allophones receive tone, duration and energy values . These parameters depend on the voice used and the intonation type. For long and short phrases we use different parameters. For pitch they set declination (based on average pitch) and deviation from it depending on stress and its type. Duration and energy are also specified depending on the position in the phrase and stress as deviations from average. The parameters are manually adjusted with respect to statistics. So, for a new voice we can immediately apply only a model from a different voice combined with the average characteristics of the new voice. But for accurate tuning we need some additional time to obtain appropriate quality.
3. Hybrid approach
Our hybrid HM
M plus unit selection approach is described in detail in . It combines all the advantages of both methods. Features used for model training and then for generating the necessary physical characteristics of allophones are listed in Solomennik A. I., Chistikov P. G.
features
Phone before previous Phone after next
Previous phone Phone position from the beginning of the syllable
Current phone Phone position from the end of the syllable
Next phone
Syllable features
Previous syllable Syllable position from the end of the word
Current syllable Syllable position from the beginning of the sentence
Next syllable Syllable position from the end of the sentence
Number of phones in the previous syllable
Number of stressed syllables before current syllable in the sentence
Number of phones in the current syllable
Number of stressed syllables after current syllable in the sentence
Number of phones in the next syllable Vowel type in the current syllable
Syllable position from the beginning of the word
Word features
Part of speech of the previous word Number of syllables in the current word
Part of speech of the current word Number of syllables in the next word
Part of speech of the next word Word position from the beginning of the sentence
Number of syllables in the previous word
Word position from the end of the sentence
Sentence features
Number of syllables in the current sentence
End punctuation type (comma, full stop, etc.)
Number of words in the current sentence
The speech parameters are obtained from HM
Ms whose observation vectors consist of mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFC
C), pitch and duration features; the speech signal is generated by a unit selection algorithm using the obtained speech parameters. The phonetic and linguistic information for the training parameters derives from the speech corpus markup . 4. Experiment
In our experiment we follow the recommendations of the state standard specification GOS
T R 50840-95 “
Speech transmission through communication channels. Methods for quality, intelligibility and recognizability evaluation” . This standard specification is also applied to speech synthesizers evaluation.
Evaluation of naturalness of synthesized speech with different prosodic models The new female TT
S voice Julia was tested. The evaluated synthetic speech variants were the following:1. Rule-based prosody on a small speech corpus of 20 minutes (with manually corrected labels).
2. Rule-based prosody on a speech corpus of about 2.5 hours of speech (with manually corrected labels).
3. HM
M-based prosody on the same speech corpus (2.5 hours, manual correction).
4. Rule-based prosody on a large (6 hours) automatically labeled speech corpus
(without manual correction).
17 listeners, 8 female and 9 male aged from 20 to 55 were subjects for the listen
ing test. Among them 11 were trained (i. e. in one way or another closely familiar with synthetic speech) while the other 6 had little or no contact with synthetic speech before.
They were given the task to rate the naturalness of 4 synthetic and one natural speech variants of seven test utterances:(1) Если хочешь быть здоров, советует Татьяна Илье, чисть зубы пастой «Жемчуг»!(2) Вчера на московском заводе малолитражных автомобилей состоялось собрание молодежи и комсомольцев.
(3) В клумбах сочинской здравницы «Пуща», сообщает нам автоинспектор, обожгли шихту.
(4) Тропический какаду — это крупный попугай? Ты не злословишь?(5) Актеры и актрисы драматического театра часто покупают в этой аптеке антибиотики.
(6) Нам с вами сидеть и обсуждать эти слухи некогда!(7) Так ты считаешь, что техникой мы обеспечены на весь сезон?
Ratings could vary from 0 to 5 with a step of 0.1 with clear description of rates (from ):
Speech characteristics Rates
Natural-sounding speech, some subtle distortion present. Wheeze, rattle missing. High recognizability> 4.5
Some violation of naturalness and recognizability, a weak presence of one type of distortion (burr, twang, wheeze, rattle, etc.)3.6–4.5
Audible violation of naturalness and recognizability, presence of several types of distortion (burr, twang, wheeze, rattle, etc.)2.6–3.5
Constant presence of distortions (burr, twang, wheeze, rattle, etc.). A significant violation of naturalness and recognizability1.7–2.5
Strong mechanical distortion: burr, twang, wheeze, rattle, etc., mechanical voice. A significant loss of naturalness and recognizability is observed< 1.7
Solomennik A. I., Chistikov P. G.
variants of each utterance were given in a random order with possibility of listening for each utterance several times if needed. The obtained ratings are as follows:TT
S type Mean Standard deviation20 min. database 3.6 0.9
Rule-based prosody (2.5 hours) 4.1 0.7HM
M-based prosody (2.5 hours) 4.3 0.6
Auto-labeled database (6 hours) 3.7 0.8
Natural speech 4.9 0.1
If we exclude results for two subjects that show more than 20 % deviation from mean ratings and normalize the score to the rating of natural speech (as recommended by the standard specification) we will have 4.4 and 4.5 for rule-based and hybrid approaches respectively. All the synthetic types appeared to be in the same I class (rates from 3.6 to 4.5) of quality (according to ).
It should be mentioned that there was a clear connection between the rates and the subject’s familiarity with synthetic speech. This may be seen in the diagram below where “a” means “naive” listener and “b” — a listener familiar with TT
S (rates were averaged for all of four TT
S types):to familiarity to TT
S (“a” — “naive” listener, “b” — familiar to TTS)
Evaluation of naturalness of synthesized speech with different prosodic models We can observe that subjects unaccustomed to synthetic speech tend to give lower rates than others.
5. Conclusion
The obtained results show that by using a hybrid approach combining HM
Mbased and unit selection speech synthesis we have come close to natural sounding Russian synthetic speech. Also its usage permits fast adaptation of prosodic prediction for a new voice. For these reasons we plan to integrate HM
M-based speech parameter generation in our voice-building system . Another important result is that even a small but phonetically balanced corpus can provide us with acceptable quality of synthetic speech.
However, there are still some problems to investigate and several ways of improving our system. Firstly, our evaluation of TT
S using the purely automatically labeled speech corpus showed that there is room for improvement in the algorithm for detecting periods of fundamental frequency. Another way to improve prosodic quality is to include more verbal features for model training, primarily special words — potential intonation markers (specific conjunctions, particles etc.). There is also a strong need for a more powerful and at the same time generally accepted method of TT
S evaluation in Russian.
